doc: Document binary blobs (#47678)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: doc/contribute/bin_blobs.rst

.. _bin-blobs:

.. warning::

   This page documents Zephyr's support for binary blobs. The tooling and
   infrastructure for this purpose are still incomplete, and so this page may
   refer to future additions.

Binary Blobs
************

In the context of an operating system that supports multiple architectures and
many different IC families, some functionality may be unavailable without the
help of executable code distributed in binary form.
Binary blobs (or blobs for short) are files containing machine code or data in
proprietary formats, e.g. without corresponding source code released under an
OSI approved license.

> Zephyr supports the distribution and use of binary blobs via its built-in

Author: Right, so just like before, here by "distribution" I meant something else, namely "the obtention of binary blobs using Zephyr tools"

> Zephyr supports the distribution and use of binary blobs via its built-in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Zephyr tools support downloading third party binaries via their built-in
```

mechanisms, with some important caveats, described in the following sections. It
is important to note that all the information in this section applies only to

> upstream or vanilla Zephyr. There are no limitations whatsoever (except perhaps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
upstream or vanilla Zephyr hosted at https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos as of August 2022. There are no limitations whatsoever (except perhaps
```

Author: Why do you want to add this? We do not specify "Zephyr" in this manner anywhere else in the doc

Reviewer 2: I tend to agree with @marc-hb. URL has the merit of defining upstream without ambiguity or need for further definition.

license compatibility) in the support for binary blobs in forks or third-party
distributions of Zephyr. In fact, Zephyr’s build system supports arbitrary use
cases related to blobs. This includes linking against libraries, flashing images
to targets, etc. Users are therefore free to create Zephyr-based downstream
software which uses binary blobs if they cannot meet the requirements described
in this page.

Software license
================

> Binary blobs do not typically use OSI approved licenses such as the Apache-2.0

Reviewer: Can any OSI (=open source) licence apply to any binary without source?

license. Instead most blobs are distributed under proprietary licenses which
vary wildly in nature and conditions.
Licenses will be approved individually by the Technical Steering Committe (TSC)

> upon request of inclusion of a binary blob.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
upon request of "inclusion" (as defined below) of a binary blob.
```

> Blob vendors may impose a click-through or other EULA-like workflow when users

Reviewer: Interesting question but it's not clear whether automation and validation are supposed part of this document or not. There is something about a test suite in the "Limited Scope" below but it looks like "work in progress". Maybe it would be more practical to discuss separately?

fetch and install blobs, but this is not required

Hosting
=======

Blobs must be hosted on the Internet and managed by third-party infrastructure.
Two potential examples are Git repositories and web servers managed by
individual hardware vendors.

The Zephyr Project will not host binary blobs in its Git repositories or
anywhere else.

Distribution
============

> Distribution happens via a west extension command which users

Author: I don't really mind using another word, but "distribution" here was meant in the same context as in the original document, so basically "delivery of the binary blobs to the user". Do you prefer if I use "delivery"?

> Distribution happens via a west extension command which users

Reviewer 3: ... *Fetching* from an Official Distribution

> Distribution happens via a west extension command which users

Author: So the section would be named "Fetching" and we would avoid using the word "distribution" altogether best? I'd rather use "source" than "distribution" to name the place where are fetching from then.

> Distribution happens via a west extension command which users

Reviewer 3: ... Fetching from an Official Distribution Source :-)

> Distribution happens via a west extension command which users

Reviewer: Maybe it has diverged from plain English but a "Linux distribution" is completely unrelated to where and how it's downloaded. It's just a collection of software packages than have been tested and work together. I would just avoid the word "distribution" in this context.

> Distribution happens via a west extension command which users

Author: I agree. Either we use "distribution" as "noun. An act of [distributing](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/distribute) or state of being distributed." or not at all IMHO.

> can run to fetch binary blobs via the Internet. The extension command

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
can run to fetch binary blobs from the host infrastructure. The extension command
```

Author: Tweaked

implementation is hosted in the main zephyr repository. This is required to

> give the project overall control over the mechanism used to fetch the blobs.

Reviewer: Great, this is useful please say it somewhere in the doc (sorry if I missed it)

The blobs themselves must be specified in the :file:`module.yml` files included
in separate Zephyr :ref:`module repositories <modules>` maintained by their
respective vendors.  This means that in order to submit a binary blob to the

> upstream Zephyr distribution, a module repository must exist first or be created
> as part of the submission process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
upstream Zephyr distribution, a module repository must exist first or be created
through usual Zephyr submission process.
```

Each blob which may be fetched must be individually identified in the

> corresponding :file:`module.yml` file. A specification for a blob must contain:

Reviewer 2: When doing so, please provide a reference to "tainting" definition.

- Purpose: an abstract description of the blob itself
- A reference to vendor-provided documentation
- The blob’s type, which must be one of the allowed types
- A checksum for the blob, which the west extension checks after downloading.
  This is required for reproducibility and to allow bisecting issues as blobs
  change using Git and west

> - License text applicable to the blob or a reference to such text

Reviewer 4: Should we try to incorporate SPDX tags for blob licenses as well to allow for them to be included in the SBOM?

Author: I will add "in SPDX format", since as you mentioned the other day, SPDX supports arbitrary proprietary licenses.

> 

Reviewer 2: Can we add a version information ?
Checksum is ok, but doesn't allow user to perform easy manual identification.

The west extension used to fetch blobs accepts command line arguments that
allow the user to select the module or modules to fetch blobs from. This is
required for user control and a uniform user experience regardless of the blob
vendor.

Allowed types
=============

The following binary blob types are acceptable in Zephyr:

* Precompiled libraries: Hardware enablement libraries, distributed in
  precompiled binary form, typically for SoC peripherals. An example could be an
  enablement library for a wireless peripheral
* Firmware images: An image containing the executable code for a secondary
  processor or CPU.  This can be full or partial (typically delta or patch data)
  and is generally copied into RAM or flash memory by the main CPU. An example
  could be the firmware for the core running a Bluetooth LE Controller
* Miscellaneous binary data files. An example could be pre-trained neural
  network model data

Note that just because a blob has an acceptable type does not imply that it will
be unconditionally accepted by the project; any blob may be rejected for other

> reasons on a case by case basis.

Reviewer 2: This may sound arbitrary. Maybe we can add an typical example of a such blob that would be rejected?

Author: done

In case of disagreement, the TSC is the arbiter of whether a particular blob
fits in one of the above types.

Hardware agnostic features provided via a proprietary library are not
acceptable. For example, a proprietary and hardware agnostic TCP/IP stack

> distributed as a static archive would be rejected.

Reviewer 2: Move this paragraph before the previous note.

Author: done

Precompiled library-specific requirements
=========================================

This section contains additional requirements specific to precompiled library
blobs.

Any person who wishes to submit a precompiled library must represent that it
meets these requirements. The project may remove a blob from the upstream
distribution if it is discovered that the blob fails to meet these requirements
later on.

Interface header files
----------------------

The precompiled library must be accompanied by one or more header files,
distributed under an OSI approved license, that define the interface to the

> library.

Author: Because we still want the SBOM excluding binaries to be compatible with Zephyr's OSS licensing model. Actually, I will add there "non-copyleft" as well.

Allowed dependencies
--------------------

This section defines requirements related to external symbols that a library
blob requires the build system to provide.

> * The blob must not depend on Zephyr APIs directly. This is required for loose

Reviewer: Maybe this could be more precise. How about
```suggestion
* The blob must not depend on Zephyr APIs directly. In other words, it must have been possible to build the binary without any Zephyr source code or part of present. This is required for loose
```

Reviewer: This could leave a `dlopen()/dlsym()` "loophole" potentially open but that would seem a bit "extreme" and... spirit/letter of the "law"?

  coupling and maintainability, since Zephyr APIs may change and such blobs
  cannot be modified by all project maintainers
* Instead, an implementation of a porting layer defining all such symbols can be
  provided alongside the library if required. The implementation must be in

>   source code form, released under an OSI approved license

Author: ok

Toolchain requirements
----------------------

> Library blobs must be in a data format which is compatible with a toolchain

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Library blobs must be in a data format which is compatible with and can be linked by a toolchain
```

> Library blobs must be in a data format which is compatible with a toolchain

Author: Well, there are special cases like Espressif's or Synopsys' reliance on particular modified toolchains. That is OK because it is required anyway for the software to build at all for their ICs, even when not using binary blobs.

> supported by the Zephyr Project. This is required for maintainability and

Reviewer: Is there already an authoritative toolchain list somewhere? Add a link?

Reviewer: I don't think you can start a sentence with "MUST be in ... supported by the Zephyr project" and "keep this intentionally vague". I mean you cannot mandate people to do something intentionally vague, that does not make sense to me sorry. If it is a MUST requirement then you need to at least briefly describe what you mean by "supported by the Zephyr project" as you just started doing in your answer.

Author: Thanks, fixed.

> usability. Use of such libraries may require special compiler and/or linker

Reviewer 5: Does Zephyr (will it?) have any tooling in place to detect if, for example, the vendors has compiled a static library with `-fshort-enums` but the user has not set this flag?

Reviewer: Does any such ABI tooling exist anywhere in the C/C++ universe? I mean not just for `-fshort-enums`.
https://gankra.github.io/blah/c-isnt-a-language/#c-doesnt-actually-have-an-abi

Reviewer 5: Maybe https://github.com/lvc/abi-compliance-checker? I have never used it, but it seems to me like it might allow to come up with a solution for this priblem.

Author: This should be documented by the vendor, but is currently out of scope for this document.

Reviewer 5: I do understand, but then would propose to make the tainted state of any resulting binary extremely well visible and maybe even not disablable (in upstream). Pretty sure people will (often) fall into this trap and they will blame Zephyr for (at least until someone educates them). Better make it easy to detect this situation, e.g. for when helping someone via bug tracker.

flags, however. For example, a porting layer may require special flags, or a
static archive may require use of specific linker flags.

Limited scope
-------------

> Allowing arbitrary library blobs would carry a risk of degrading the degree to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Allowing arbitrary library blobs carries a risk of degrading the degree to
```

which the upstream Zephyr software distribution is open source. As an extreme
example, a target with a zephyr kernel clock driver that is just a porting layer
around a library blob would not be bootable with open source software.

> To mitigate this risk, the scope of upstream library blobs will be limited. The

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To mitigate this risk, the scope of upstream library blobs is limited. The
```

project maintainers must define an open source test suite that an upstream

> target must be able to pass using only open source software included in the

Reviewer 5: I did not mean the binary blobs.

What I meant is that the license of the "open source test suite", and the open source software included in Zephyr/the modules it relies on, should be OSI approved.

> mainline distribution and its modules. The scope of this test suite may grow

Reviewer 5: Would rather force providers of blobs to not be able to get away with reducing the testing scope retroactively:

```suggestion
mainline distribution and its modules. The scope of this test suite may grow (but not shrink) 
```

Author: Sounds good.

Reviewer 5: Actually, now that I realized that the test suite is defined by the *project* maintainer and not the maintainer of the blob, I'd rather retract my proposal. As everything is at the discretion of the project maintainers anyway, forcing them to maintain some turned-out-to-be-a-useless-test forever seems like a bad idea.

over time, but the goal is to specify tests for a minimal feature set which must
be supported via open source software for any target with upstream Zephyr

> support.

Author: In this Pull Request we should decide on this particular point, or at least on an initial version of it.

I suggest we require all platforms to be able to run the `tests/kernel` suite without the use of binary blobs.

Reviewer 4: That sounds like a good starting point. Perhaps we can have a special "opensource" `tag` in the testcase.yml files to allow this to be easily ran using twister.

Author: I will start with:

- `samples/philosophers`
- `tests/kernel`

At the discretion of the release team, the project may remove support for a
hardware target if it cannot pass this test suite.

Support and maintenance
=======================

The Zephyr Project is not expected to be responsible for the maintenance and

> support of contributed binary blobs. Indeed, at the discretion of the Zephyr

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
support of contributed binary blobs. As a consequence, at the discretion of the Zephyr
```

> .. _bin-blobs:

Reviewer 6: I can't really tell who this document is for. It's trying to do too many things to live in the contribution guide in my opinion. If not now, then eventually I think we need to tease this apart a bit more.

Given that it's in the contribution guide, I guess the intended audience is people who want to submit blobs.

If that's the case, I think that the language could be tightened up a bit and reworked into more of a "here is how to submit blobs", "here are the things you can do", "here are the things you cannot do", "here are the things you must do".

Right now the language is kind of a mix between things like this:

> Zephyr supports downloading and using third-party binary blobs via its built-in mechanisms, with some important caveats, described in the following sections.

which reads like part of a user guide for how to use binary blobs, rather than a contributor guide for how to submit them, and stuff like this:

> It is up to the vendor to specify the license as part of the blob submission process.

Which is language I would expect to see in a contribution guide for blobs, and things like this:

> The Zephyr Project is not expected to be responsible for the maintenance and
> support of contributed binary blobs. As a consequence, at the discretion of the
> Zephyr Project release team, and on a case-by-case basis:
>
> - GitHub issues reported on the zephyr repository tracker that require use of
>   blobs to reproduce may not be treated as bugs

Which I would expect somewhere under "Project and Governance" in our documentation.

Author: I had the same feeling when writing it. But I looked at our current documentation for [external components](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/contribute/external.html) and got some inspiration from the layout and contents in there. I would define this page as "the ultimate guide to binary blobs in Zephyr, for interested users and vendors alike". I don't necessarily think this is a bad thing: it combines all the info related to binary blobs and Zephyr in one single page, just like the external contributions does. However, some of this may end up in the modules page in the future, especially when I submit the next PR that contains the actual command and its documentation.

Reviewer 6: >  I would define this page as "the ultimate guide to binary blobs in Zephyr, for interested users and vendors alike".

That is fine, but then I suggest placing it under doc/develop instead of doc/contribute, since the latter is for documentation regarding contributing to the project, while the former is a more general place for information about how to develop with zephyr.

is important to note that all the information in this section applies only to
`upstream (vanilla) Zephyr <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr>`_.

There are no limitations whatsoever (except perhaps license compatibility) in
the support for binary blobs in forks or third-party distributions of Zephyr. In
fact, Zephyr’s build system supports arbitrary use cases related to blobs. This
includes linking against libraries, flashing images to targets, etc. Users are
therefore free to create Zephyr-based downstream software which uses binary
blobs if they cannot meet the requirements described in this page.

Software license
================

Most binary blobs are distributed under proprietary licenses which vary
significantly in nature and conditions. It is up to the vendor to specify the
license as part of the blob submission process. Blob vendors may impose a
click-through or other EULA-like workflow when users fetch and install blobs.

Hosting
=======

Blobs must be hosted on the Internet and managed by third-party infrastructure.
Access to the files must be available without the need for user-level

> authentication.

Author: Agreed, this was suggested by someone but I added it only reluctantly, will remove.

Two potential examples are Git repositories and web servers managed by
individual hardware vendors.

The Zephyr Project will not host binary blobs in its Git repositories or
anywhere else.

Fetching blobs
==============

> Blobs are fetched from official third-party sources via a west extension command

Reviewer 6: I see the warning at the top of the page, but I think this should be rewritten to say "will be fetched" for now, and then when the west extension is written, this document should be updated to link directly to the documentation for the extension. Similar changes elsewhere.

Non-blocking comment.

Author: Will do, this is a reasonable suggestion.

Author: I've done this for this particular section only, and for the west extension only. It did not make sense in the rest of the text IMHO.

which users can run to this effect. The extension command implementation is
hosted in the main zephyr repository. This is required to give the project
overall control over the mechanism used to fetch the blobs.

The blobs themselves must be specified in the :file:`module.yml` files included
in separate Zephyr :ref:`module repositories <modules>` maintained by their
respective vendors.  This means that in order to submit a binary blob to the
upstream Zephyr distribution, a module repository must exist first or be created
as part of the submission process.

Each blob which may be fetched must be individually identified in the
corresponding :file:`module.yml` file. A specification for a blob must contain:

- An abstract description of the blob itself
- Version information
- A reference to vendor-provided documentation

> - The blob’s type, which must be one of the allowed types

Reviewer 6: Add reference to allowed types section below, no?

- A checksum for the blob, which the west extension checks after downloading.
  This is required for reproducibility and to allow bisecting issues as blobs
  change using Git and west
- License text applicable to the blob or a reference to such text, in SPDX
  format

> The west extension used to fetch blobs accepts command line arguments that allow

Reviewer 6: Reminder to document that west blobs fetches blobs only, not source code, somewhere

the user to select the module or modules to fetch blobs from, as well as
obtaining information and metadata on available blobs. This is required for user
control and a uniform user experience regardless of the blob vendor.

Tainting
========

Inclusion of binary blobs will taint the Zephyr build. The definition of
tainting originates in the `Linux kernel
<https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/admin-guide/tainted-kernels.html>`_ and,

> in the context of Zephyr, a tainted image will be one that includes binary blobs

Reviewer 5: I think there should be a distinction between precompiled library blobs, running in the Zephyr application's address space and other blobs like firmware images which "just" get uploaded to a secondary, independent MCU. The first type of blob does have the potential to wreak havoc on the Zephyr application, the later ones do not.

How about e.g. TAINT_BLOBS_LINKED for precompiled libraries and TAINT_BLOBS_DATA for firmware images, etc.?

Author: We are already differentiating at the "type" level, but will add a note here about this.

in it.

Tainting will be communicated to the user in the following manners:

> - A Kconfig option ``TAINT_BLOBS`` will be set to ``true``

Reviewer 6: `y`, not `true`

> - The Zephyr build system, during its configuration phase, will issue a warning

Reviewer 5: I like my build system to not issue any warnings. For this, I'd need e.g. a `TAINT_BLOBS_ACCEPTED` Kconfig option which would allow me to silence this warning for good in selected projects by enabling it.

Author: Sure, we can make the CMake warning go away by enabling a particular Kconfig option, that's fine. I think those details can be discussed later on when we actually introduce those Kconfig options. Right now this is more a statement of intentions.

meets these requirements. The project may remove a blob from the upstream
distribution if it is discovered that the blob fails to meet these requirements
later on.

Interface header files
----------------------

The precompiled library must be accompanied by one or more header files,
distributed under a non-copyleft OSI approved license, that define the interface
to the library.

Allowed dependencies
--------------------

This section defines requirements related to external symbols that a library
blob requires the build system to provide.

* The blob must not depend on Zephyr APIs directly. In other words, it must have
  been possible to build the binary without any Zephyr source code present at
  all. This is required for loose coupling and maintainability, since Zephyr
  APIs may change and such blobs cannot be modified by all project maintainers
* Instead, if the code in the precompiled library requires functionality
  provided by Zephyr (or an RTOS in general), an implementation of an OS
  abstraction layer (aka porting layer) can be provided alongside the library.
  The implementation of this OS abstraction layer must be in source code form,

>   released under an OSI approved license and thoroughfully documented using

Reviewer 6: Though "thoroughfully" is a delightful neologism, I guess you meant "thoroughly"? Do we have a standard for what that means? I'm a bit confused here. We neither discussed nor voted on that requirement as far as I can tell.

Author: I will remove the epithet, as delightful as it might be ;)

  Doxygen

Toolchain requirements
----------------------

Precompiled library blobs must be in a data format which is compatible with and
can be linked by a toolchain supported by the Zephyr Project (i.e. a toolchain

> that can build Zephyr applications). This is required for maintainability and

Reviewer 6: This `i.e.` parenthetical is a non sequitur in my opinion.

Just because a toolchain can build zephyr applications does not mean that the toolchain is supported by the zephyr project itself. Oticon's toolchain is a counterexample.

Author: Correct you are. This was again a free adaptation of someone else's comment. I will rewrite this so that it reflects what we really mean here.

usability. Use of such libraries may require special compiler and/or linker
flags, however. For example, a porting layer may require special flags, or a
static archive may require use of specific linker flags.

Limited scope
-------------

Allowing arbitrary library blobs carries a risk of degrading the degree to
which the upstream Zephyr software distribution is open source. As an extreme
example, a target with a zephyr kernel clock driver that is just a porting layer
around a library blob would not be bootable with open source software.

To mitigate this risk, the scope of upstream library blobs is limited. The
project maintainers define an open source test suite that an upstream
target must be able to pass using only open source software included in the
mainline distribution and its modules. The open source test suite currently
consists of:

- :file:`samples/philosophers`

> - :file:`tests/kernel`

Reviewer 6: I guess we have to start somewhere, but I think future work needs to make it clearer how to run and collect test results. cc @PerMac

help of executable code distributed in binary form.  Binary blobs (or blobs for
short) are files containing proprietary machine code or data in a binary format,
e.g. without corresponding source code released under an OSI approved license.

Zephyr supports downloading and using third-party binary blobs via its built-in
mechanisms, with some important caveats, described in the following sections. It
is important to note that all the information in this section applies only to
`upstream (vanilla) Zephyr <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr>`_.

There are no limitations whatsoever (except perhaps license compatibility) in
the support for binary blobs in forks or third-party distributions of Zephyr. In
fact, Zephyr’s build system supports arbitrary use cases related to blobs. This
includes linking against libraries, flashing images to targets, etc. Users are
therefore free to create Zephyr-based downstream software which uses binary
blobs if they cannot meet the requirements described in this page.

Software license
================

Most binary blobs are distributed under proprietary licenses which vary wildly

> in nature and conditions.  Licenses will be approved individually by the

Reviewer 3: The TSC to approve license of binary blobs that are not being added into zephyr directly? I look at the original document and this applies only to the porting layer, not to the blob itself. Can you please point me where this is coming from?

Author: Yes, you are right, there is no mention of license approval by the TSC at all in the original document. Should we then not check licenses for the blob itself at all, and let vendors just populate that freely?

- A checksum for the blob, which the west extension checks after downloading.
  This is required for reproducibility and to allow bisecting issues as blobs
  change using Git and west
- License text applicable to the blob or a reference to such text, in SPDX
  format

The west extension used to fetch blobs will accept command line arguments that
will allow the user to select the module or modules to fetch blobs from, as well
as obtaining information and metadata on available blobs. This is required for
user control and a uniform user experience regardless of the blob vendor.

The west extension will only fetch and download the binary blobs themselves. Any
accompanying code must be present in the corresponding module repository.

Tainting
========

Inclusion of binary blobs will taint the Zephyr build. The definition of
tainting originates in the `Linux kernel
<https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/admin-guide/tainted-kernels.html>`_ and,
in the context of Zephyr, a tainted image will be one that includes binary blobs
in it.

Tainting will be communicated to the user in the following manners:

- One or more Kconfig options ``TAINT_BLOBS_*`` will be set to ``y``

> - The Zephyr build system, during its configuration phase, will issue a warning

Reviewer 6: Missing period at end of sentence in this latest update.

Author: Fixed
